# lab11-1: Working with systemd
## OBJECTIVE

In this lab, you will install MariaDB, a SQL database, to practice working with systemd.  You will also add a graphical interface to server2 and then remove it.

## SETUP

There are no special setup steps for this lab.

## STEPS

Do these steps on server2.

1. List all existing services to see if the mariadb and tftp services already exist (I would suggest filtering the output of systemctl with grep to make finding the answer easier)
1. Install both the mariadb-server and tftp-server packages (they are not installed on server2 by default)
1. Also install the tftp package as you will need the client for testing (the mariadb-server package installs the client automatically as a dependency)
1. Check the status of the "mariadb" service
1. Configure the mariadb server to start at boot and start it now (you should be able to do this with a single command)
1. Check the status of the "mariadb" service again to confirm it is running

  > Note 1: MariaDB is an evolution of MySQL so programs designed to work with MySQL should also work with MariaDB.  Specifically, the mysql command line client is still used with MariaDB.

  > Note 2: MariaDB and MySQL databases maintain their own user accounts which are separate from the system user accounts.  This means you can create database accounts for users to login to the database remotely without having to give them Linux accounts which they could use to login to the server directly.  This can be slightly confusing because you are likely to use the same usernames for both and even the database admin account is also named "root".  However, the passwords you set for both the system accounts and database accounts are stored in different locations and can be different.  The RHCSA exam does not require you to know how to configure and manage a database so this is just bonus information.

  > Note 3: The default installation of MariaDB is not secure by default.  This makes it easy to get started with SQL before learning about the security model for adding database users and restricting their access to specific databases.  However, it is advised you not leave the server in this state and a script is provided to help you tighten up security on the server.  Once you have confirmed the mariadb service is running, run ```sudo mysql_secure_installation``` and follow the prompts to secure your database server.  The root password (the database admin account, not the Linux root account) is not set by default so you can just press enter when prompted for it and then set it to whatever you like.  Once you have locked down the database server, you can verify you can connect to it with ```mysql -h localhost -u root -p``` which will prompt you for the database admin's password which you just set.  You should get a ```MariaDB>``` prompt from which you can run the ```status``` command before running ```quit``` to exit.  If you want to begin playing with SQL, you might start with:

   ```
   create database mytest;
   use mytest;
   ```

  > and create tables after that (remember, SQL commands end in ```;```).  The ```help``` command is your friend and command line completion is initiated with the tab key just like it is at the shell prompt.

1. Install the "Server with GUI" package environement on server2 and configure server2 to boot to a graphical interface
1. Reboot to verify the system boots to a graphical environment and the mariadb service is started at boot
1. Reset server2 back to a text only server using systemctl and yum history
